"Hi everybody. Welcome back to No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming to you
from the QI offices in Covent Garden. My name is Andrew Hunter Murray. I am sitting here
with Anna Tijinski, James Harkin and Anne Miller. And once again, we have gathered around
the microphones with our four favourite facts, not from the last seven days, from our new
book. Oh my goodness, we've written a book. It's called One, Three, Four, Two, QI Facts
to leave you flabbergasted and it is out now. To celebrate that and plug the book, we have
each brought our favourite fact from the book. And starting in no particular order, we begin
with James. Okay, my fact is that four-year-old mice are less common than 100-year-old humans.
Nice. Might as well do all 100-year-old humans are very posh, aren't they? So, I see.
It's a play on the word common. I don't know how you class a mouse though. What do you
mean? Do they like Cheddar or Ementel or Yark? So yeah, this is just simply a fact that mice
don't live very long. Yeah, it's unbelievable that they're so short-lived. It's not extraordinary.
They're tiny. That's interesting what you say, Andy, because you're equating smallness
with lack of longevity. Do you think that's true in general? No, I guess because they're
smallnesses. It was like tiny grades. Yeah, true. All right, I take it all back.
Parrots? They're quite small. They're bigger than a mouse as well.
They live a long time, Parrots. Oh, yeah. Yeah, there's one parrot called Charlie the Parrot
who's owner claims he's 117 and used to belong to Winston Churchill. But what I like is
if one's looked into this and so Mr. Oram who owns him now says his father-in-law sold
him to Churchill in 1937 and then got him back when Churchill died and the Churchill family
and all historians have questioned this and say they can't find any evidence that Churchill
owned a parrot. And I would have just thought, like obviously we'd know if Churchill had
a pet parrot, right? No, I don't think we would because. Do you remember there was that thing
when Frobe's came out and they were banned from government offices because they could repeat
things? So if he had a parrot, he would have to be illegal. Because he might repeat all
the secrets. So you couldn't tell anyone that you had a parrot? Churchill had a secret parrot
is what we're saying. This is the greatest conspiracy fact.
So the world's oldest mouse, which is an article about whom I found this fact is called
Yoda and Yoda celebrated his fourth birthday on April 10th. Yeah, yeah, and he got to the
age of four and this is the quote in a pathogen free rest home for geriatric mice. And he had
a cage make called Princess Leia. And I said this, I mentioned this to Dan, who was sitting
in the room and I was doing my research earlier. And Dan very dismissively said, they didn't
even meet. So that Yoda, basically, if you're four years old as a mouse, that's the equivalence
of 136 in human years. Wow. This is very old. Yeah. Well, it's older than any humans have
been. Yeah. So well done mice. They've beaten us in a way. So, so we've definitely beaten them.
It's weird though, because they're doing a lot of experiments into how to make mice
live longer in the hope that we can then make humans live longer the same way. And one
thing it does work is calorie restricted diets that they just live longer when you give
them less calories. But lots of mice in cages are fed a diet which is almost exclusively
starch and sugar. It's like feeding someone donuts, basically, and expecting them to
get to a ripe old age. Although they, I mean, when they eat in the wild, they live less
long than when they eat in captivity. And they eat more than starch and sugar in the wild
presumably. I guess the wild is less easy habitat to get to an old age in because it's,
you know, you're outdoors and you're exposed to the elements slightly less than a pathogen
free rest home. Yeah. Yeah. There was a guy already a fall last week who was saying that
domestic cats should all be euthanised and no one should be allowed them because they
caused such devastation to the bird population. Yeah. Yeah. It's very, very angry. They kill
lots of small animals. And I think I've heard that especially in Australia they're trying
to, you know, get rid of cats. Yeah. I think they've destroyed something like 65 bird species
in the last 50 years. Oh. There's quite a lot of species to have got rid of. Yeah. Yeah.
I was looking at a research lab called the Jackson Lab which I think this one was in Maine
and they had mice who they said before and a half. I've opened that down there. There must
be three and a half. If this is the oldest. But they, what they had mice who they said before
and a half, which they said is over twice the life expectancy. And I quite like this quote.
So the researcher who's working with the most closely said the mice are two girls and
she's become really, really attached to them. So she totally loves them now and she treats
them really, really well. And she says we move them to a new cage and we take care when
we pick them up to cup them in our hands, rather than pick them up by the tail with the four
steps. It's the luxury mice. Yeah. It's a level of extreme care and attention they get.
My friend told me that because rabbits are natural prey, every time you pick up a rabbit
it thinks it's about to be eaten. So it's really stressful for rabbits to be handled. It's
way too big. It might really gently let go down to them. Otherwise you think you're picking
up for a hug. It thinks. Yeah. That's why they're completely bastards when you pick
them up. I don't suppose any animals really think when you pick them up they're going
to get a hug. They should be consistently pleasantly surprised in that case.
And Robert, it's so ungrateful. Have you guys heard of the Black 6 C57 BL/6. Slash 6?
Yeah. No. This is so cool. This is a particular kind of mouse which gets used in almost all experiments.
It's like the standard currency of mouse experiments. Five in six American research mice are
there's one very particular strain. It was created in 1921 or a huge thing like there's a huge
article on slate about them. Created in 1921 when a mouse codenamed C52 mounted one called
C57 and deposited its semen in her reproductive tract with a waxy plug. That's a very sexy article
you've been reading. And so basically almost all experiments in America are mice and most
experiments on animals are done on mice. So it's most of most of them. And the problem is
we think that they're kind of standard mice and they're treated as such in experiments.
But they're really unusual. They all think they're special. Well, no, they are special.
This is the interesting thing because they are susceptible to morphine addiction and they
like alcohol. And that makes you special, does it? Normal mice, I'm afraid not. It doesn't
make you special. But they're exceptional in their pain responses and other things like
this. So actually there's no such thing as a perfect average mouse to experiment on.
That's really interesting because what you lose by having the mouse be it one kind you gain
because all your experiments are controlled by the same kind of mice. Exactly. Yeah. That's
true. And one thing it does, it does mouse barbering behavior. So cutting mice hair. Yeah.
This is where you have several different mice in the same cage. The dominant mouse will
selectively remove hair from its cage mates to show that it's in charge. All the subordinate
mice are going around with little bulb patches on them. Really? Wow, to mark them out as his
slaves. Yeah. Actually speaking of my stress, you know mice are more stressed around men than
around women and they've just discovered this and they think it's going to have to be controlled
for in future experiments with mice. Do we know why? So we assume it's because they have
a reaction to the testosterone. So they just have the same reaction as they do to male mice.
And a male is often going to be more bellicose I suppose. I've just made mice. I've just
island feminists and they get really annoyed with the patriarchy. It could be that. They
definitely release more of this stress hormone. So they put male researchers with mice and
their bodies cause through with all these hormones that they don't have when they have they're
with females. But yeah, it means in future when you're doing experiments, we need to control
for that because their bodies are behaving completely differently depending on his working
on them. Will we become more stressed when I approach them than when another woman approaches
them? Yeah, I've noticed that. Does that make me a mouse? No, no, I've made you a researcher
and then a mouse. Oh, it makes it work, does it? It's not just women there and is it? People,
people who come stressed when I approach them. And mice actually. Did you see that they've
made transparent mice? No. Yeah, I mean, no, you obviously wouldn't see that they've
made transparent mice with you. Where have the transparent mice? Oh no, that's okay,
they're still there. Go on, Andy, you can see a window. Can you? Can you? You can see a window
frame. You can see where the window is. I'm looking at the window right now and I'm doubting.
I know has these amazing eyes that can see the molecules in the glass. They can see reflections
and little bits of grime. Okay, these mice. They've got fingerprints all over them. Yes.
So scientists have made transparent mice and this is on something they do to mice after
they've died is they inject chemicals into them and they pump these chemicals through
their blood vessels, through their brain, through their spinal cords, through all their organs.
And it gets sort of he, me, H-E-M-E, which is the stuff in hemoglobin. And that's what gives
a lot of the stuff in their body its color and other stuff that's big creating obstacles
to the eyes. And it makes them completely transparent, but it means that we can study them
much more easily because usually when you're studying dead mice as organs, let's say you've
got a diabetic mouse and you want to work out how that works, then you'd have to cut
the organs up and you could distort them. But in this way, you can just look at it from
the outside and see everything inside it. Sure. It'd be more useful to have transparent
living mice, I think. I know. I think they're working on that.
Yeah. Didn't you find a thing in QI about putting windows and cows?
Yeah. So they put these windows and cow's stomachs, which means that you can, if a cow's
got a stomach infection, you can just insert whatever is needed to be inserted into the cow's
stomach to make its infection better. That's very cool. Other old animals? Oh, yeah.
Greenland sharks. Yeah. They're really old. They've recently found out that they might live
up to around 400 years, maybe even older. What? They looked at some females, 28 female Greenland
sharks. And they worked out that they, all this one, was somewhere between 272 years old
and 512 years old. Wow. The Greenland shark, they didn't know until quite recently how long
they actually lived. This is like, could be anywhere between like 20 and 400 years and no
one years. Well, still it's anywhere between 272 and 512, which is quite a big discrabbit.
1744, that one would have been born at the least. The 2721? Yeah, if it was sharp.
It's a shame they couldn't have been born in a year where one of us had a useful historical
reference to compare it to 1744. Anyone got anything? I'm not talking about my head.
So one of the King George's was on the throne. Great. Thanks, Andy. That's really
a sport. Do you imagine that? Have you heard of Claire Hollingworth? Claire Hollingworth?
No. No. I was on the list of Wikipedia centenarians basically. They have all these categories
and they've got, you know, sports people and they've got artists and they've got scientists
and they've also got a miscellaneous category. Absolutely. Yes, please. And Claire Hollingworth
was the journalist who basically discovered the Second World War. She was 27. How did
you discover the Second World War? Well, she broke the story in Britain, basically.
And when I say that, she was 27, she was a brand new journalist, as in she had just met
the editor of the telegraph and said, why aren't you hire me and why aren't you send me
to Poland? So he wrote, learnt it and sent it to Poland. And a few days into her trip,
she was returning to Poland after a cross-border trip into Germany. And she noticed all
the way along the road, there were these big screens of Hessian up alongside the road
and the wind blew one of them up and it revealed loads of German tanks.
No way. Did Germany invade Poland by the load of screens? And then the wind blew and they're
like, oh, dumb. It's very scary. I've got to win with that. It's very Scooby-Doo, isn't it?
This is what happened. No, it is. It is. This was from the Guardian. I trust the Guardian.
Has anyone checked whether Germany's invaded anywhere else recently? Look for the Hessian
screens. Wait, how, I have no idea how that's related to what we're talking about.
Centenarians. She lived to 100. Sorry. She's more common than a four-year-old mouse. Nice.
Yeah, Centenarians. So I was looking up some things about aging and how we can age better.
And so, you know, people always go and look at villages in town, sort of full of really
really old people. And so the latest is a report in NPR which looked at the village of
Akia Ruli in Italy. And it has 300 people in it who are over 100, which is a third of
the population of that village. And so a doctor went there and did a little study and
noted that there were two dietary habits. And I basically mentioned this so people can
take it on board and imitate it. He said that everyone ate anchovies at every meal and
they had rosemary with everything. And that's the key. That's the secret.
Oh, that's weird, isn't it? Because I wouldn't have personally just wouldn't put those
two things together. Every meal. They're having every meal anchovies and rosemary.
Look, they're not enjoying the taste, James. But that's a bit of advice. I looked at these
tips too and they're brilliant because they always contradict each other. And there's one
where if you sleep for fewer than six hours a night, you're four times a lot late to die.
But if you sleep for more seven to eight hours, 30% higher chance of death, which means you
sleep for basically exactly six hours according to these studies, or you're going to die.
I mean, you're going to die anyway.
Before you're going to die anyway, is the problem?
I'm not.
I don't know about you guys. Since someone's worrying, it's said that for every hour of TV you watch
after the age 25, you knock off 22 minutes off your life expectancy.
What if you're watching an hour long documentary on how to extend your life?
It's called a Paradox.
I would do that for quite a lot of TV shows. I would take that ahead.
What about Gogglebox?
Absolutely. Gogglebox is the best one to watch because you get lots of TV in one show.
I was going to say, what if, if you're watching someone watching TV, is that a 45 minutes
show? Double penalties.
Some more centenarians just going back to what Andy was saying before.
My incredibly relevant story about Claire Hollingworth.
Isn't that cool? That's what we discussed.
Anyway, sorry, go on.
Emma Marano, on Marano, is the oldest person in the world at the moment.
She is the only person born in the 19th century who's still alive.
She's the oldest Italian, as well as the oldest of everyone.
Whatever you'd say is she's Italian.
And she's the oldest from a tiny Italian village.
What a coincidence.
She credits her long life to her diet of raw eggs and being single.
I think what she means is she credits being single to her diet of raw eggs.
The oldest man is a guy called Israel Kristal and he's 45 years older than the state of Israel.
Wow.
That's good.
Great.
Good work, yeah.
So it was named after him.
No, no.
It was very careful.
It was named after him.
Okay, it's time for fact number two and that is Anna.
My fact this week is that the detective agency that hunted butch Cassidy also worked for
Coca-Cola.
Yeah, I just really love this overlapping of its two roles.
So this is a detective agency called the Pinkerton Detective Agency and it was a very
big deal in the 19th century.
It was a bunch of detectives were hired to hunt down all the all the greats of the Wild West.
So they hunted butch in the Sundance Kid, they hunted Jesse James for years and also they
were employed in 1916 by this guy called Harold Hirsch who wanted to spy on other companies
and make sure they weren't stealing Coca-Cola's trademark because he was running Coca-Cola
at the time.
And yeah, he sent them undercover to soda fountains.
He's almost as dangerous as going after bootcasts.
Can you imagine that career step after being in a shootout with the Sundance Kid.
I'm going to send you to a soda fountain undercover to collect samples of Coca and check.
Really?
There were a lot of limitations.
I found a list of all the companies that they went after for using their name.
Okay.
You want to hear something?
Yeah.
Some of them are very close.
So they were after a candy-cola, celery-cola, Coca-Cola, or with K's.
Coca-Cola Coke with a see-then-a-k, Coca and Coca-Cola hyphenated, Coca-Rica, yes, it's
a Coca-Cola and Coca-Cola.
Coca-Cola all with K's is especially egregious, that's outrageous.
I saw Coke, K, O, K, E, and they also went after a company called Dope.
Dope?
Yeah.
Dope and Coke.
They were made by the same manufacturer who had actually been a partner of the guy who went
on to set up Coca-Cola, but yeah, they called it Dope.
So the Coca-Cola company sort of begs people that it's advertising, not to refer to their
drink as Coke, because that made it much easier to copy because so many drinks are called Coke.
But people still did call it Coke, as we do, but equally they called it Dope.
So you'd say you can have a cup of Dope, and that was obviously a reference to its former
cocaine content.
So people knew it as the drink that had the drugs in it.
It didn't have actual cocaine in it, did it?
It had the, is it, the Coca-Leaves, or it had...
Yeah, it had, I think it had basically cocaine in it.
What was interesting was that when it was taken out of Coca-Cola, at the very, at the
sort of turn of the century, they still, in the advertising implied that it contained cocaine
because they still wanted people to think they were going to get that kick.
And so they used to get in trouble, and there was a lawsuit filed against them for implying
that they drink contained cocaine when outrageously it didn't.
That's fantastic.
Should we, should we also say who Butch Cassidy was?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah, so Butch Cassidy, for those of you who haven't seen one of the greatest films
they've made, was a Wild West outlaw in the 1800s.
And he conducted various train robberies.
He was hunted by this pink to an agency.
So in Butch Cassidy and the Sundance kid, it's these detectives who are always on their
tail.
And eventually they drove them out of America, and they ended up in Bolivia.
And then there's lots of theories about what happened to them.
So it's assumed they were killed in a shootout in Bolivia, and that's how the film ends, certainly.
Or actually, you don't see them dying the film, do you?
Boyle of very much a legend.
Sorry.
Sorry, that is true.
But yeah, there are lots of theories.
There apparently there was a guy called William T. Phillips, who surfaced in America in 1908
or 1909.
And he was recognized by a bunch of people, a bunch of policemen who chased Butch in the
olden days, and his ex-girlfriend.
And this guy's adopted son says it had always been accepted in the family that he'd been
Butch Cassidy.
And he even wrote this manuscript in 1934, William T. Phillips saying, this is what happened
to Butch Cassidy without saying, oh, that's who I am.
But saying Butch Cassidy got away at the shootout, the Sundance kid was killed.
And so--
And there's little details that he threw in as well, it was really detailed.
Yes.
Photography.
Yeah.
And he didn't die till 1934.
So--
So one of the former president of Bolivia, René Berrientos, he actually investigated the
idea that Butch and Sundance had been killed in a shootout outside of Bolivian
bank.
He interviewed villagers personally who had been, you know, witnesses or nearly witnesses.
And he checked out army files.
And I've got in mind those that he dug up bodies.
I think actually he had bodies dug up.
But he eventually concluded that the shootout story was a fabrication.
Did he?
Yeah.
Although there is a town in Bolivia that says this is the resting place, or here lie Butch Cassidy
in the Sundance kid, don't they?
I think it's called San Vicente.
Oh really?
You would do for the tourism wouldn't you?
You wouldn't say, butch and Sundance got away from this place.
That's true.
Did you know that the movie was originally called The Sundance Kid and Butch Cassidy?
That's it.
No way.
Wow.
That's not a worst ever name for a film.
It feels like that's what is now, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Well, never know if it would have felt absolutely normal.
Because Paul Newman was going to play Sundance.
That's right.
But then they needed to switch that over for some reason.
And then they had a thing where oddly Robert Revford, who wasn't as big a star, was
then going to be playing Sundance as Sundance was going to be first in the name of the film.
So then they said, well, we have to switch the name of the film as well now.
Doesn't make any sense.
Sundance was the protégé.
It would have been totally ridiculous and not in accordance with the real history of the
thing.
All right.
Okay.
But yeah, I think I said in a, might have said before that he had a Lancasterian accent.
Was it this movie?
This movie.
Well, his father and mother both came from the North of England and didn't move to America
till quite late on in life.
That sounds great.
Oh, yeah.
Suddenly a one over.
Yeah.
Well, you know, people always say that I sound like a real butch world west.
And you really remind me of Paul Newman.
So, yeah.
I don't know what he looks like, but I can only imagine.
Oh, I mean, he's the most attractive man ever.
Born.
I can see where you're coming from now.
The Pinkerton detectives then.
Do you guys have stuff on that?
Um.
And their motto.
Okay.
What was their motto?
We never sleep.
And also we're chronically exhausted.
Yeah.
I read in one place that their logo was a large black and white eye, and that's supposedly
where the phrase "private eye" comes from.
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh, that's true.
Do you know who Pinkerton was?
He was a barrel maker.
He was from Scotland.
Yeah.
And living near Chicago.
Oh, I like him already.
And one night he went to the woods to get more wood for staves to make into barrels.
And he found the remains of a campsite and he got suspicious and he went back the following
night.
And he found a group of counterfeiters making coins.
And he got the gang arrest and everyone said, "Oh, great job, Pinkerton.
You should investigate more of these counterfeit cases."
And so he did.
He just started investigating things and then set up this enormous country-wide agency.
So he had a Scottish accent and Custley had a Lancasterian accent.
So if they ever do an audio play of this, then Anne and I could play the two.
Yeah.
And I think there are agents already if anyone's ringing off the hook next door.
But I think they were seen as a threat to Pinkerton's by the end of the 19th century
and in fact were forced to disband because they were so big and the government law enforcement
didn't like that they were posing this threat.
So they were larger than the US military by the 1890s.
They had 2,000 people full-time on their books and they had 30,000 reserves, which is more
men than in a standing army.
For a detective work.
I know.
Yeah.
That's amazing.
It is amazing.
They were all reserves, of course.
So I don't know if they could have called them all up full-time.
No.
I think they all had normal jobs probably most of the time and then sort of spied on people
as a hobby at weekend.
I'm a Pinkerton.
There's 30 of you with notebooks.
Yeah.
Do you know what Pepsi was originally called?
What?
Brad's Drink.
Was it just for Brad?
It was just for Brad.
It was Caleb Bradham, who was the inventor and it was named, it was like Coca-Cola, but
it didn't have any Coca-Cola in it.
So I think they were casting around desperately for another name.
It's interesting that Coca-Cola, these days you could buy a bottle with the word Brad on
it.
That must really sting to Pepsi.
Yeah.
That's a good point.
If you're out.
Freud said it cured his depression and made him more sexually active.
Coca-Cola.
Really?
Yeah.
They would say, what would you like to drink in a go?
Coke.
Okay.
It's time for fact number three, which is my fact.
Which is that you cannot get to the highest point of Mauritania with a compass.
Right.
Well, you can't get to it.
You can't take a compass with you.
But you can't use a compass to navigate to it, even if you have a map and the opposition.
Because it's completely made of magnetite with the mountain, which is a natural magnet and
as a result, it'll send your compass completely haywire.
Well, you would think, actually, that no matter where you were in the world, if you were
close enough, it would point you towards this massive mountain, so actually, it would work
really well.
It wouldn't get you to the top, would it?
Because it would just point directly down at the mountain once you got it.
So it would get you to the base of the mountain.
That's a really good point.
But it would be perfect for getting you to the base of the mountain, but then it's useless.
But I read this amazing article this week, I think it's on crack, about life saving tips
and things that you should know.
And they said that if you get caught in an avalanche, everything is white, so you could
be cooked on the witch way down.
Which way is down?
What you should do is you should clear some space around your mouth and spit.
And whichever way you spit falls, you do, which is down, so you go down the way.
Do you really think you wouldn't know which way was down, because you still have gravity?
You're still going to be light headed.
I sometimes get that in bed.
Do you?
Do you spell your face?
You know the thing where you're like about a momentarily, you don't know which way you're
facing.
Sure.
But that's not really the same.
The one way you can't breathe, that's your facing into the pillow, Andy.
This mountain, just to say, is blue, isn't it?
Yeah.
Which is quite cool.
So you could definitely find it without a com.
I think it's the magnetite that makes it blue.
So from above, you can identify it.
And there's this other amazing thing in Mauritania, which is 25 kilometres wide, but we didn't
know it existed until we had the ability to fly.
This is the thing called the Eye of the Sahara.
And it was hidden for many, many millennia.
It's this beautiful swirling rock formation.
It's these blue rocks, and it looks like a big bullseye.
But no one noticed it was there until, I think it was when we went to space, or maybe
when someone was flying over it, but from space they say it becomes particularly striking,
because it's in the middle of the Sahara, so there's nothing all around in this huge
Bruce world.
Gemini for in 1965 was when they discovered it.
Was it?
Yeah.
And we have no idea what it is, do we?
They thought it was from an asteroid, but now they don't think so.
And now they're saying they think it's seismic activity, pushing this dome up.
But why is it a circle?
They have no idea.
Yeah, some kind of uplift.
It does happen fairly often, but not very often in a circular way.
Yeah.
It's basically like art attack when you'd be doing the big one and you wouldn't know what
it was.
And they pan out at the end, and you see it, and that's what they basically this is like.
Yeah, that was great.
Yeah.
It's bloody loved that.
Mauritania is an interesting country.
It's 90% Sahara desert.
It's only got 3.5 million people.
And yet they have found the time to have 11 coos or attempted coos since 1960.
11 coos?
That's a lot.
Yeah.
It's a good solid number.
And also they still have loads of slavery.
The most coos is Bolivia, isn't it?
I think.
They've had loads.
They've had something like 191 in the 190 year history.
They've certainly had one more coo than they've had years.
Yeah.
Well, that'll be the cocaine.
And there was a really weird incident, and did you see this, 2012 in Mauritania, where
the president was shot.
And then they said, "Oh, the president's been shot by accident.
It's fine.
It was a mistake, and just a bit of a mix up.
And it's all fine now."
And that may have been a, you know, an aborted coo or something like that.
Really?
Yeah.
Some things on highest points.
Oh, yeah.
There's a list of highest points of countries on Wikipedia.
Murray Hill is the highest point of Christmas Island.
Oh.
It was a nice fact.
Oh, I'm absolutely chuffed.
Do you think there are many tennis fans who have accidentally booked a trip to Murray Hill?
The highest point of the French Polynesian Island territory of Wallace and Futuna is called
Mount Puke.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
P-U-K-E, but it's pronounced poo-k.
Wallace and Futuna is one of the quietest places in the world.
It is so quiet.
You've been there.
No, I haven't.
But James and I did a thing.
We were researching loads and loads of countries.
And James started at the beginning of the alphabet and I started at the end.
And let's just say, the afternoon, I spent researching Wallace and Futuna was pretty slow.
Did you find the Mount Puke thing?
I think I did.
Yeah.
I think there's not much else.
I mean, there are about two things on there.
And one of them is a place called Mount Puke is quite hard even for a search of my limited
ability to find it.
Is it even a volcano?
Because that might make sense.
Is it puking again?
It comes from the Polynesian word poo-k, which means mound.
I see.
And poo-k, poo-k means like an uneven surface or something with lots of mounds.
So does it mean mound?
Mound mound.
Yeah.
Do you think they get annoyed with having to explain to every single British lad tourist
who comes that it's pronounced poo-k?
There are no British lad tourists of Wallace and Futuna.
Actually, I'm just looking up Wallace and Futuna now.
I'm just going to see what gems I can find.
No one has opened this file since the 25th of October 2011.
This is very exciting.
This is like ancient history, a few I saw.
A little time capsule.
Yeah.
Do you want to know the mountain fact from the book while you're looking at it?
Sure.
So the highest point of Canada was only determined in 1992.
Really?
Yeah.
Yeah, I won't show before then.
When Edmund Hillary got to the top of Everest, he celebrated by having a wee.
That's how I usually celebrate.
Actually, you've been celebrating a bit much around the office recently, and to be honest.
It's true.
It was my birthday yesterday.
I thought you'd appreciate it.
I left it on your desk and everything.
Can we see what else is in that Wallace and Futuna?
Guys, it's pretty thin groove.
Population.
Population is 15,400, which is about a tenth that of Swindon.
That's good.
That's okay.
Okay.
It was the only French colony to side with the Vischy collaborationist government during
the Second World War.
Yeah.
And that lasted until a regiment of US Marines arrived in 1942 and said cannibalism was banned
there in 1830.
Oh.
Oh, that's quite ahead of its time.
Yeah.
For cannibalism.
No, it's not.
In Polynesia.
Cannibalism is still technically not illegal in the UK.
You're right.
There's not a specific law.
Basically, they'll do you for something.
Yeah.
But not that.
So you could be done for desecrating grave or a corpse or a movement of evidence.
Yeah.
There's a lot of things you can get done for, but specifically cannibalism is not illegal
in the UK, but it is illegal in Wallace and Futuna.
It has been for a hundred and a half years.
Actually, Mauritania was the last country in the world to abolish slavery, which it did
in 2007.
2007.
Yeah, and it didn't make it a crime until 2012.
Wow.
But the thing is, I've read reports saying that it still happens a lot.
Yeah.
It's four years out.
It's not long to change.
This is, I mean, such rough estimates.
Between 4% and 20% of the population are still enslaved.
So what?
Although, in the interest of balance, I think the Mauritonian government has denied that
has said that foreign reports of it are exaggerated.
Should we talk a bit about magnets for legal safety?
Yeah.
Yes, magnet.
So here, line up from north to south even when fleeing, do they?
Even if that involves fleeing straight into the hands of the person that are running away
for help.
No, actually, it might make sense because it keeps the herd of animals together.
Unless, of course, they run in different directions.
You wouldn't bump into anyone because you're all going parallel to one of them.
Exactly.
Yeah.
I've always went to study this with dogs.
You know, when they said that dogs poo and line with the earth, magnetic field or something.
And I know people have done studies, but I'm actually going to go to Richmond Park this
week and I don't have much on and see if this is actually true because it so doesn't feel
like it's true.
You're going to go and chase deer and see if they run or--
I sure am.
Yeah.
Okay, it's time for the final effect and that is end.
My fact is that in 2015, a plane had to make an emergency landing after the smoke alarm
was triggered by farting sheep.
Amazing.
It was over 2000 sheep in the cargo hold and the alarms went off.
It appears to be the methane emitted by the sheep figured the alarm could not believe that
you can transport 2000 sheep on a plane like a sheep.
That is a lot of sheep.
Well, I guess they kind of--
Well, they don't demand the same leg room.
Well, the world record for people on a flight is 1888 and two of those were born on during
the flight.
Was that an air lift out of Israel or something?
Yeah.
Wasn't it out of Africa or into Israel?
You're right.
It was.
Out of Ethiopia and into Israel.
In 1991.
Yeah.
It was a Jewish community who were at a risk of a war or something in Israel or from an air
lift.
That's right.
But yeah, it's incredible this fact.
This happened again in November last year with goats on a different plane.
What?
That's so weird.
It's happened again in 2014 with cows on a different plane.
Guess what the headline in the Sun article was about the farting goats on the plane.
Goats on a plane.
Not bad.
It's about farting.
Specifically farting.
Oh, gas.
Gas.
It's almost famous goat.
It's Billy goat gas.
Billy goat.
Goat.
That's better than Billy goat gas.
Billy goat goat was the sun headline.
Great.
Yes, it does seem to be weirdly common.
They need to get better alarms, I think.
I suppose if the alarm goes off, you better not be like, oh, it's probably the fart and then
your plane goes down.
It's better to land than be like, oh, we're okay.
But sir, there are no sheep on board.
It's fine.
It's always the fine animals.
In 2014, it was the fire alarm, not the smoker alarm, and I think it was caused by the cows
overheating.
Wow.
Oh, no, the heat sensor.
Yeah, exactly.
And they thought it was a fire and they landed in case it was.
In 2012, a plane had to make a landing after a call broke out of someone's hand luggage.
Oh, there we are.
Yeah.
And it bit its owner and escaped and they were like, oh, I'm fine, I'm fine.
They're like, you need to go off the plane now.
If someone didn't quote Samuel Jackson at that moment, that is the greatest travesty
ever known to man.
Okay.
What about maggots on a plane?
Do you see that?
There's sort of mini snakes.
Go on.
This was a US Airways flight at Lanter Airport.
It wasn't allowed to take off, actually, because maggots started falling out of the overhead
compartments.
Oh, my god.
Someone had left a container of old meat and it caused a delay.
This was a flight to Charlotte.
And someone said that there was only one maggot landed on that, but she felt like they were
crawling all over me because it only takes one maggot to upset your world.
I don't think it's fair.
And as they're telling us to stay calm and seated, I see a maggot looking back at me and
I'm thinking, these are anaerobic Fleshy Tiglavi that the flight attendants don't have
to sit with.
But I like that thought that they're anaerobic.
Yeah.
Was she a chemist?
I don't know.
I think these are bloody maggots.
Get me off.
They're moving my seat.
They're just fly larvae, though.
Not just.
They are anaerobic fly larvae.
Oh, that's a very good point.
I hadn't considered that.
All right.
There was a flight got rounded for human flatulence in 2006 after a lady was farting on
a plane, but she was a bit embarrassed and to get rid of the smell, she lit a match.
She really shouldn't do on planes.
In the blue compartment, can't you?
No.
They're very clear.
You're not allowed to light anything in the blue.
I've got smoke sensors.
I know.
But that's to stop people smoking cigarettes, isn't it?
Yeah, you're not supposed to be lighting matches in a pressurised environment.
I think people smell sulfur.
I've been getting away with it for years and years, and I always have a joystick on a plane
to calm myself down.
Well, here's a headline from March 2015, "BA flight forced to land early because of
smelly poo."
Well, the flight to Dubai from Heathrow, and one passenger said, "We knew something was
a bit odd.
About ten minutes later, the pilot said, 'You may have noticed there's quite a pundit
smell coming from one of the toilets.'
He said it was liquid, fecal, excrement.
Those are the words he used."
He said, "I'm coming from the passenger and I'm in profile."
But the plane was in the air for 30 minutes, and then got turned around, had to go back to
Heathrow, because apparently it was a risk because they only recycle half the air, and
this was so smelly, apparently.
It was 15 hours until the next flight left, and they had to all stay overnight.
It wasn't like they had to wait that long for the smell to go.
I think I'd leave it for 15 hours.
I think they destroyed the plane in the end.
That's very good.
I was on the plane recently, and I was chatting to the ex and he was asked, because it was
quite late, and I ordered a toasting, and I saw how'd you this hand signal to the person
at the other end of the plane, like a crocodile, and I said, "Oh, what's that?"
And she said, "It's because one person's at the front doing the food and one's taking
the orders down the plane, and rather than yelling, they have hand signals."
So toasty is a crocodile, because it's like a crock of a show in France.
A smiley face, holding your hand and make a smile, is this cheese sandwich, cheesy, great.
Oh, no.
Sapping your shoulder is chips, because chip on the shoulder.
Right.
Even a whole system.
What's the signal for those in India?
I was put in the toilet.
So they transported horses to the Olympics in Rio this year, and the race horses got
more leg rooms than your standard horse transports.
Oh.
I learned.
Yeah.
So usually it's three horses to a cabin, and these ones were two, because they're special
horses with special talents who deserve business class treatment.
That is so unegalitarian.
Exactly.
But they also pilot more carefully with horses than with people.
They don't do, normally, we get pilots doing loop-to-loop, so.
And the horses just hate that.
No, it's not more carefully, but they do more gradual take-offs and landings, so they spend
much longer on take-off and landing.
They don't do it as steeply so that the deceleration acceleration isn't as much because
horses get...
I don't like horses because you can't explain to a horse, okay, you're going to go in a plane
now.
Where is the humans?
We know what's going on.
A plane operated by the airline FlyB was first a turn back after a B became stuck in one
of its instruments.
A B.
Is that true?
Yeah.
What which instrument?
What instrument on a plane is so sensitive?
Well, they're all important, I imagine.
But B's can't do too much damage, can they?
It was like sitting on a button that was crucial, and you thought he'd press it, you'll
get stung.
Sitting on a button.
Oh, maybe it was.
Lower the landing gear.
I can't.
It's a peak.
A cock-pie-loving man caused a minor alert at Manchester airport when he tried to carry
one through security.
Apparently, the juice inside the pie set off the kind of thing that was looking for liquids.
The people in security said it must have been a very juicy pie.
But we've all got liquid in us, so why don't we set off the alarm?
That is a great point.
You're right.
I'm not sure you're quite as juicy as a cock-pie.
No.
Don't be insane, James.
Nobody's as juicy as a good pork pie.
Anyone would think that this was just a made-up story by a tap like he's paid for.
We should end.
OK, that's it, that's all of our Vax, thank you so much for listening.
If you've enjoyed listening to this podcast, please buy 20 or 30 copies of the book.
It's 1, 3, 4, 2, QI Facts to leave you flabbergasted and you can get it by going to qi.com/shop.
You can also follow us on Twitter.
I'm on @andruhunterm, James.
@egshaped.
And?
@millar_am.
Anna?
You can email podcasts at qi.com.
And you can also go to our group account at qi.com or go to no such thing as a fish.com where
there are many more episodes and the lights are waiting you.
Thank you so much for listening.
See you again next time.
Goodbye.
[MUSIC]